4	Chapter 4: Implementation
This chapter discusses the implementation details of the project. You are not required to insert source code here; however, you must document the core module functionalities using pseudocode where applicable.

Note: You are required to follow proper coding standard to write your source code. For guidelines, General Coding Standards & Guidelines are provided in Appendix D.

In addition to pseudocode and UI/API documentation, if your implementation includes any techniques from Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), Deep Learning (DL), Data Science, or Cyber security, you must also include the following details wherever applicable:

•	The specific technique/model/algorithm applied (e.g., Decision Trees, CNNs, Autoencoders, Encryption Algorithms).
•	The dataset used (source, size, format, any preprocessing applied).
•	Training procedure and evaluation methodology.
•	Achieved metrics (accuracy, precision, recall, F1-score, confusion matrix, etc.).
•	Explanation of how the implementation meets or supports the project’s objectives.
4.1	Project Methodology & Algorithms
This section explains the methodology (step-by-step approach) and the core algorithms that power the system. Students should avoid trivial operations (e.g., login, logout, simple CRUD) and instead focus on the methods and algorithms that:
•	Enforce business rules
•	Perform optimization or scheduling
•	Implement intelligent features such as prediction, classification, or recommendation
4.1.1	Project Methodology (Step-by-Step Approach)
The methodology describes the overall approach taken to implement the system. Students must clearly describe each stage of their implementation pipeline, including what was done, how it was done, and why it was necessary.

Template:

1.	Data Collection
o	What: Describe the type of data collected (e.g., logs, sensor data, datasets).
o	How: Mention the source (e.g., CICIDS dataset, IoT sensors, API).
o	Why: Explain why this data is important for the project.
2.	Data Preprocessing
o	Missing Values: Explain how you handled them (e.g., mean substitution, forward fill).
o	Duplicates: Describe how duplicates were removed (e.g., unique IDs, timestamps).
o	Normalization: Mention scaling technique if used (e.g., Min-Max scaling, standardization).
3.	Feature Extraction & Selection
o	What: List the key features used (e.g., packet size, user review keywords, image attributes).
o	How: Explain how features were extracted and irrelevant ones removed (e.g., correlation filtering, PCA).
4.	Model Training
o	Algorithm(s): State the machine learning or AI models used (e.g., Random Forest, CNN, LSTM).
o	Training: Mention dataset split (train/test) and evaluation method.
o	Why: Explain why this model was chosen for the problem.
5.	Advanced Techniques (if applicable)
o	NLP: If analyzing text (e.g., logs, reviews), describe tokenization, sentiment analysis, etc.
o	Blockchain: If securing data, explain how transactions are stored immutably.
o	Computer Vision: If using images, mention detection or classification methods.
6.	Deployment
o	What: Describe the final system (web app, dashboard, mobile app).
o	How: Mention deployment platform (e.g., cloud, server).
o	Why: State the value of real-time access or monitoring.

Example: 

Project Methodology

The implementation of the Cybersecurity Threat Detection System followed the steps below:
1.	Data Collection
o	Network traffic data was gathered from firewall logs and intrusion detection systems.
o	Public cybersecurity datasets such as CICIDS and UNSW-NB15 were used to train and test the model.
2.	Data Preprocessing
o	Missing values were filled using forward filling or average substitution.
o	Duplicates were identified using session IDs and removed.
o	Data was normalized using Min-Max scaling to prepare it for machine learning algorithms.
3.	Feature Extraction & Selection
o	Key features such as packet size, protocol type, and connection duration were extracted.
o	Highly correlated or redundant features were removed using correlation analysis to reduce noise.
4.	Machine Learning Model Training
o	Random Forest and Deep Neural Networks were trained to classify traffic into normal or attack.
o	Models were evaluated using accuracy, precision, recall, and F1-score.
5.	NLP-Based Log Analysis
o	Security logs were processed with tokenization and keyword extraction.
o	Suspicious activities (e.g., repeated login failures) were detected through pattern recognition.
6.	Blockchain-Based Security
o	Detected attack records and alerts were logged in a blockchain ledger.
o	This ensured that all events were tamper-proof and auditable.
7.	Deployment & Monitoring
o	The trained models were deployed on a cloud platform.
o	A real-time dashboard displayed alerts, anomalies, and system health for administrators.
4.1.2	Algorithm 
This section documents the major algorithms that power the system. Students should avoid trivial operations such as login, logout, or simple CRUD actions. Instead, they should describe algorithms that:
•	Enforce business rules
•	Perform optimization or scheduling
•	Implement intelligent features such as prediction, classification, or recommendation
Each algorithm must include its name, input, output, and pseudocode steps. Following are some examples of documenting algorithms in pseudocode format.

Table 4.1: Examples of Algorithms
Algorithm Name	Details
DiscountCalculation (Business Rule)
	Input: OrderAmount 
Output: FinalPrice 
Pseudocode: 
1: procedure DiscountCalculation(OrderAmount) 
2:   Discount ← 0 
3:   if OrderAmount ≥ 5000 then Discount ← 0.20 
4:   else if OrderAmount ≥ 2000 then Discount ← 0.10 
5:   else Discount ← 0.0 
6:   FinalPrice ← OrderAmount – (OrderAmount * Discount) 
7:   return FinalPrice 
8: end procedure



AppointmentScheduling (Optimization)	Input: DoctorSchedule, PatientPreferredSlot 
Output: ConfirmedAppointment or “Slot Unavailable” 
Pseudocode: 
1: procedure AppointmentScheduling(DoctorSchedule, PatientPreferredSlot) 
2:   for each Slot in DoctorSchedule do 
3:     if Slot == PatientPreferredSlot AND Slot is Available then 
4:       ConfirmedAppointment ← Book(Patient, Slot) 
5:       return ConfirmedAppointment 
6:     end if 
7:   end for 
8:   return "Slot Unavailable" 
9: end procedure
SentimentPrediction (AI/Data Science)	Input: TrainedModel, InputText 
Output: Sentiment (Positive/Negative) 
Pseudocode: 
1: procedure SentimentPrediction(Model, Text) 
2:   CleanedText ← preprocess(Text) 
3:   Features ← vectorize(CleanedText) 
4:   Prediction ← Model.predict(Features) 
5:   if Prediction ≥ 0.5 then return “Positive” 
6:   else return “Negative” 
7: end procedure
4.1.3	Guideline for Students
•	Document 1–3 algorithms depending on your project.
•	Use pseudocode instead of actual programming code.
•	Select algorithms that represent core rules, optimization, or intelligent logic in the system.
4.2	Training Results & Model Evaluation (Mandatory for AI/ML/Data Science Projects)
•	Describe:
o	Dataset used (name, source, pre-processing)
o	Training setup (platform, GPU/CPU, batch size, epochs)
o	Performance metrics
o	Screenshots of graphs (loss, accuracy, confusion matrix, ROC if applicable)
4.3	Security Techniques (if applicable)
•	Describe techniques used for:
o	Authentication (JWT, OAuth)
o	Encryption (AES, RSA)
o	Attack prevention (XSS, SQLi handling)
•	If using a model for intrusion detection or anomaly detection, explain its results.
4.4	External APIs/SDKs
Describe the third-party APIs/SDKs used in the project implementation in the following table. Few examples of APIs are provided in the table.

Table 4.2 Details of APIs used in the project
Name of API and version	Description of API	Purpose of usage	List down the API endpoint/function/class in which it is used
Stripe (version 2020-08-27)	Credit Card payment integration	Sandbox used for the orders payment 	stripe.paymentMethods.create

Cloudinary	Image and Video management solution	Uploading Product Images on Cloudinary server	https://api.cloudinary.com/v1_1/demo/image/upload
4.5	User Interface
Details about user interface with descriptions. Provide the User Interface for each sub-system (such as Mobile App, Web App, Client App, Admin App). Provide description of each User Interface explaining the details.
When inserting User Interfaces, use appropriate size of the image, for example, for mobile app, 2-4 screens can be placed on a single page.

Following are few examples of User Interfaces:
4.5.1	Login Screen					4.5.2 Home Screen

Login screen of our mobile app where user 		Home screen where total, delayed and 
have to choose its role and its company.		Other complaints are shown.
								

 
Figure 4.1 Login Screen
4.5.3	Assignee Dashboard
Complain Assignee can view the graphs of month-wise complains, Resolved complains, summary and a list of submitted complains.

 
Figure 4.3 Assignee Dashboard
4.5.4	New Complaint 
Complain Assignee and Complainer can create a new complain by providing Description, Category, Title, Location etc.
4.6	Deployment
Specify the deployment environment used to host and test the application (e.g., Firebase, AWS, Azure, VPS). Mention details of cloud hosting, server configuration, backend frameworks, and relevant software stack including versions. 
5	Chapter 5: Testing and Evaluation
Once the system has been successfully developed, testing has to be performed to ensure that the system working as intended. This is also to check that the system meets the requirements stated earlier. Besides that, system testing will help in finding the errors that may be hidden from the user. The testing must be completed before it is deployed for use. 

There are few types of testing which includes the unit testing, functional testing and integration testing. 
You are required to perform each of these in-depth to ensure system quality.
5.1	Unit Testing
Unit testing verifies the smallest testable components of the software (e.g., individual functions, methods, or classes) in isolation. The purpose is to ensure that each unit performs as expected, independent of the full system.
At the FYP level:
•	Software Engineering students may demonstrate automated unit tests using JUnit, PyTest, or similar frameworks.
•	Other programs (CS, AI, Cybersecurity, Data Science) may show simplified unit-level tests where functions or algorithms are executed with inputs and outputs compared against expected results.

Unit Testing 1:  validateEmail() function with valid and invalid credentials
Testing Objective: To ensure the email validation function works correctly with valid and invalid inputs.
No.	Test case/Test script	Attribute and Value	Expected Result	Actual Result
1	Call validateEmail() with valid email	"abc@gmail.com"	Validates as correct email (True)	True
2	Call validateEmail() with invalid email	"abc.gmail.com"	Rejects input and returns False	False
3	Call validateEmail() with empty string	""	Rejects input and returns False	False
5.2	Functional Testing
Functional testing validates that the system modules work correctly as a whole, ensuring that the developed system meets its specifications and requirements. Unlike unit testing, which focuses on internal functions, functional testing evaluates user-facing features through the UI or APIs.

Functional Testing 1: Login with different roles (Management, Patient, Doctor) 
Objective: To ensure that the correct page with the correct navigation bar is loaded.  

No.	Test Case	Attribute and value	Expected Result	Actual Result	Result
1	Login as ‘Management’	Username: M003, Password: 1234	Management dashboard with navigation bar is displayed	Redirected to Management main page	Pass
2	Login as ‘Doctor’	Username: D003, Password: 1234	Doctor dashboard with navigation bar is displayed	Login failed – invalid credentials error	Fail
5.3	Business Rules Testing
Decision table based testing technique is used to test business rules. The business rules were defined in FRs and Use Cases
Decision based testing uses a systematic approach where input and outputs are provided in tabular form. It is a precise and compact way to model complicated logic. The table contains conditions and actions are used for test cases where conditions as inputs and actions as outputs.

Detailed example is as given in Appendix E.
5.4	Integration Testing
Integration testing verifies that different modules of the system work together correctly. Unlike unit testing (which checks isolated functions) and functional testing (which checks features from a user’s perspective), integration testing focuses on the interfaces, linkages, and data flow between modules developed by different team members.

Since FYPs are team-based, integration testing is essential to ensure that the combined work of individual members forms a functioning system. Students must design at least one or two integration scenarios to demonstrate how modules interact and exchange data.

Integration Testing 1:   Scheduling Patient Appointment
Testing Objective: To ensure the scheduling is being done correctly and the interface between module ‘Patient/Doctor Management’ and module ‘Appointment/Scheduling’ is running correctly.

No.	Test case/Test script 
	Attribute and value 
	Expected result 
	Actual result	Result 

1	Create Appointment (Patient ↔ Doctor ↔ Scheduler)	Doctor schedule, Patient’s preferred date/time	Appointment record created with correct doctor, patient, and date/time	Appointment created successfully	Pass
2	Update Appointment (Scheduler ↔ Database ↔ Notification)	Select new date/time	Appointment updated and linked records (database + notification) reflect change	Appointment updated successfully	Pass
